---
permalink: /docs/modules/
title: "Modules"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
toc_label: "Table of contents"
toc_icon: "cog"
---

This document describes the main modules and components of the Library. To find more specific information please check the class
documentation in the source code or refer to the examples of the usage in `qf-lib/demo_scripts` directory.

# analysis
The components included in this catalogue are used to analyze strategy progress and generate files containing
the analysis results. Examples of some documents created using these components are as follows:
* [TearsheetWithoutBenchmark](readme_example_files/tearsheet_without_benchmark.pdf),
* [LeverageAnalysisSheet](readme_example_files/leverage_analysis_sheet.pdf),
* [TimeseriesAnalysis](readme_example_files/timeseries_analysis.xlsx),
* [TradesAnalysis](readme_example_files/trades_analysis.csv),
* [ModelParamsEvaluator](readme_example_files/model_params_evaluator.pdf).

# backtesting
The module contains the code of a Backtester, which  uses an event-driven architecture. The class that controls the
flow of the events is `EventManager`. Each component may subscribe to certain types of events using that module. `EventManager`
contains an events queue. When the `dispatch_next_event` is called, then the manager takes the event from the queue and
notifies all interested components (see: notifiers). Components may also generate new events by using the `publish(event)`
method.

To run a backtest:
- create a `TradingSession` (for `BacktestTradingSession` use `BacktestTradingSessionBuilder`),
- build a dictionary of `AlphaModel`s and `Ticker`s assigned to them,
- (optionally) preload price data and add use them in the `TradingSession`,
- create a `TradingStrategy`,
- call `start_trading()` method on the `TradingSession`.
An example script is available at `demo_scripts/backtester/run_alpha_model_backtest_demo.py`.

The module contains the following tools:
- **alpha_model** - a part of the Strategy responsible for calculating Signals. Each Signal contains information such as
suggested exposure, fraction at risk (helpful to determine the stop loss levels), signal confidence or expected price move.
- **alpha_models_tester** - FastAlphaModelsTester is a non-event-driven version of the backtester. It allows for quick
testing of AlphaModels' signal suggestions. As a result it generated a timeseries of portfolio returns and a table of
trades for each asset (both as BacktestSummary). The operation time of FastAlphaModelsTester is significantly shorter
in comparison to the use of Backtester, but instead the results accuracy might be lower.
- **backtest_result** - BacktestResult is a class providing simple data model containing information about the backtest:
    for example it contains a portfolio with its timeseries and trades. It can also gather additional information.
- **broker** - components which simulate a broker in the backtest. The Broker abstract class is an interface for all
potential specific implementations of brokers.
- **contract** - an equivalent of a contract in live trading. Each position has a corresponding contract.
- **contract_to_ticker_conversion** - this catalogue contains tools that connect Contracts with Tickers. Each subclass of
the abstract ContractTickerMapper corresponds to a different Ticker type (e.g. BloombergTicker).
- **data_handler** - a wrapper which can be used with any AbstractPriceDataProvider in both live and backtest environment.
It makes sure that data "from the future" is not passed into components in the backtest environment. DataHandler should be
used by all the Backtester's components (even in the live trading setup).
- **events** - this module contains all events crucial for the Backtester as well as event listeners and notifiers:
    - `Event` - super-type for all events,
    - `EmptyQueueEvent` - occurs whenever there are no events to dispatch in the `EventManager`,
    - `EndTradingEvent`- occurs when the trading should stop (e.g. when the backtest should be terminated). For now it is
    generated by `DataHandler`s in the backtest if there is no more data available for the backtest. However, in the future,
    this could be triggered by the user (from GUI or console),
    - various `RegularTimeEvent`s which occur on regular basis (e.g. each day at 17:00, each first Wednesday of a month, etc.)
- **execution_handler** - the `ExecutionHandler` abstract class handles the interaction between a set of order objects
generated by a PortfolioHandler and the set of Transaction objects that actually occur in the market. Its subclass
`SimulatedExecutionHandler` is used in the Backtester and surrounded with various components specialised in handling different
types of Orders or responsible for applying slippage, commission costs, etc.
- **monitoring** - all subclasses of `AbstractMonitor` allow for the observation of backtest results:
    - `BacktestMonitor` - displays the portfolio value as the backtest progresses and generates a PDF file at the end,
    saves the portfolio values and trades to an Excel file, saves the value of leverage in time to a PDF document,
    - `LightBacktestMonitor` - inherits the functionality of `BacktestMonitor`, however it doesn't calculate the statistics
    of trades and it only refreshes the displayed backtest progress every 20 days,
    - `DummyMonitor` - it can be used in tests or scripts that do not require any progress monitoring
    (ex. qf_lib/backtesting/monitoring/past_signals_generator.py),
    - `LiveTradingMonitor` - used to monitor live trading activities. Generates daily PDF files with backtest monitoring
    and past signals Excel file and sends them by email.
- **order** - orders are generated by a strategy, then processed by `PositionSizer` and `RiskManager`. Finally executed
by `ExecutionHandler`. Their type (market order, stop order, etc.) is determined as `ExecutionStyle`.
- **portfolio** - the `PortfolioHandler` is designed to interact with the backtesting or live trading overall event-driven
architecture. Each `PortfolioHandler` contains a `Portfolio` object, which stores the actual `BacktestPosition` objects.
The `PortfolioHandler` takes a handle to a `PositionSizer` object which determines a mechanism, based on the current
`Portfolio`, as to how to size a new `Order`. The `PortfolioHandler` also takes a handle to the `RiskManager`, which is
used to modify any generated `Orders` to remain in line with risk parameters.
- **position_sizer** - `PositionSizer`s are used to convert signals generated by `AlphaModel`s to `Orders`. There are
different types available.
- **strategy** - `TradingStrategy` puts together models and all settings around it and generates orders on before market open.
- **trading_session** - the component which wires all other components together. It keeps all the necessary settings for
the session (e.g. start date and end date of trading). It has the events' loop in which `EventManager` takes events from
the events' queue and dispatches to event listeners.

# common
The package contains all the generic tools:
- **enums** - predefined constants that are used in multiple project components
- **exceptions** - additional exception types which are specific to this project
- **tickers** - classes representing tickers of different kinds, ex. BloombergTicker or QuandlTicker
- **timeseries_analysis** - aggregating different measures of the timeseries such as total return, volatility,
sharpe ratio and many others
- **utils** - various tools:
    - *close_open_gap* - analysing the price jumps during the break after market close and before market open
    - *confidence_interval* - used for performance vs. expectation studies. Tools to check if the strategy performs withing the expectations
    - *dateutils* - manipulating the dates (e.g. change format, get the end of month date)
    - *document_exporting* - templates, styles and components used to export the results and save them as files
    - *excel* - exporting and importing data to/from Excel files
    - *factorization* - multi-linear regression tools to analyse the sensitivity 
    - *logging* - making entries in the system log (all messages should be printed through loggers)
    - *miscellaneous* - everything that is hard to categorize
    - *numberutils* - processing numbers (e.g. checking if a variable is a finite number)
    - *ratios* - calculating financial ratios (measurements like Sharpe Ratio or Omega Ratio)
    - *returns* - measurements of returns (e.g. drawdowns, linear regression, CVar) and tools for manipulating them
    (e.g. aggregating, calculating compound annual growth rates, converting simple returns to log-returns)
    - *volatility* - calculating volatility (e.g. intraday_volatility, total volatility, rolling volatility)

# Containers
Data structures that extend the functionality of `pandas Series`, `pandas DataFrame` and `numpy DataArray` containers
and facilitate the computations performed on time-indexed structures of prices or price returns. Depending on the stored
data, the 1D and 2D structures have their sub-types, such as e.g. `PricesSeries` or `SimpleReturnsDataFrame`.
The most generic 1D and 2D types are `QFSeries` and `QFDataFrame`. Any time-indexed `DataFrame` or `Series`
can be cast to a specific type using the `cast_dataframe` and `cast_series` functions.

All containers used in the system are listed below:

## 1-Dimensional containers
### pandas.Series
Vector of values. Can be indexed using both integer-based indices or label-based indices. Usually, it is labeled with
dates (pandas.DateTimeIndex/pandas.PeriodsIndex).

### TimeIndexedContainer
It is an abstract class which introduces methods specific for time-indexed containers (timeseries, multi-timeseries).

### QFSeries
It inherits from pandas.Series and from TimeIndexedContainer. It is meant to store timeseries. Normally it shouldn't be
instantiated if the more specific type of data is known (e.g shouldn't be used for storing prices or returns), because
a lot of its methods throw NotImplementedError() (e.g conversions to log-returns or simple returns).

It has 2 direct subclasses:
- PricesSeries,
- ReturnsSeries.

QFSeries concrete subclasses (LogReturnsSeries, SimpleReturnsSeries, PricesSeries) can be converted from one to another
(each concrete class knows how to be converted to each of the remaining classes). It is important to remember that some
operations on Series may result with the incorrect type of the series. In those cases, one may use the convenience
method: cast_series, which just changes the type of the series without changing values of actual data stored inside.

All QFSeries subclasses are described in the following sections:

### qf_lib.containers.PricesSeries
Container meant for storing timeseries of prices.

### qf_lib.containers.ReturnsSeries
Super-class for LogReturnsSeries and SimpleReturnsSeries. It contains the logic that is common for all series of returns.

### qf_lib.containers.LogReturnsSeries
Container meant for storing timeseries of log-returns: r_log = log(p2/p1), where p2 is the next price after p1
and r_log is the log-return. log is a natural logarithm.

### qf_lib.containers.SimpleReturnsSeries
Container meant for storing timeseries of simple returns: r = p2/p1 - 1, where p2 is the next price after p1
and r is the simple return (arithmetic return).

## 2-Dimensional containers
### pandas.DataFrame
DataFrame is the 2-D container (matrix-like) for storing data. It may also have just one column (but still won't be
considered a Series, however it can be easily converted then by calling the squeeze() method.

### QFDataFrame
It inherits from pandas.DataFrame. It is a corresponding class for QFSeries. It has 3 direct subclasses:
- PricesDataFrame,
- SimpleReturnsDataFrame,
- LogReturnsDataFrame.

All of the QFDataFrame subclasses can be converted one to another. It is important to remember, that some operations
on DataFrame may result with a lost information about a containers type or the type may be wrong. That's why there is
a convenience method: cast_dataframe which can be used to change the container's type without doing any conversions
(without changing the actual values stored inside of the container).

In QFDataFrame it is assumed that all columns have the same frequency, consider more or less the same time frame
and contain data of the same type (e.g. only log-returns or only prices).

### qf_lib.containers.PricesDataFrame
DataFrame which contains only prices.

### qf_lib.containers.SimpleReturnsDataFrame
DataFrame which contains only simple returns.

### qf_lib.containers.LogReturnsDataFrame
DataFrame which contains only log-returns.

## 3-Dimensional containers
### QFDataArray
The only 3-D container in the system is QFDataArray. It inherits from xr.DataArray. Its dimensions are usually DATES,
TICKERS, FIELDS (as in `qf_lib.containers.dimension_names`). It should be created using the create() class method
or converted from a regular xr.DataArray with from_xr_data_array(). Use of QFDataArrays instead of different 3-D structures
enables simple slicing and conversion to 2-D and 1-D QF-Lib containers.

# Data providers
They are [singletons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern) registered in the IoC container. Their purpose
is to download the financial data from data providers such as Bloomberg or Quandl. Providers shall return data in the
containers defined in `qf_lib.containers` (like `QFSeries` or `QFDataFrame`).

# Indicators
Market indicators that can be implemented in strategies or used for the analysis.

# Interactive Brokers
This catalogue contains an interface which allows to communicate with the Interactive Brokers platform. The `IBBroker`
class can be used in the live trading of your strategy.

# Plotting
To make plotting easier we implemented a lot of chart templates along with some easy-to-use decorators. Examples of their
use are shown in the `qf-lib/demo_scripts/charts` catalogue.

Each chart is a class that has a plot() method taking no arguments. An object should be initialised, then the decorators
can be added (e.g. `DataElementDecorator` or `LegendDecorator`) and finally plot() method should be called. Running
the plot() method will not display the figure. It will only draw on the axis. In order to display all the figures
that were already plotted run plt.show(block=True) where plt is defined as `import matplotlib.pyplot as plt`.
It is therefore possible to save the charts as files or add them to the report without displaying them.

# Portfolio Construction
The components in this catalogue can be helpful in the process of portfolio construction - they allow to calculate
the covariance matrix of assets and take it as input to build the portfolio according to suggested models.
The construction process involves covariance matrix optimization with one of the implemented optimizers.

# Publishers
They allow for publishing the documents (i.a. by email, to pdf or excel document).

# Technical analysis
This catalogue contains tools which facilitate the usage of TA-Lib functions in the project.

# Testing tools
Basic tools that are used in software testing. They include functions that allow e.g. comparing data structures
or creating sample column names for the test containers.
